Anarchism

Anarchism is an anti-authoritarian political philosophy that rejects hierarchies deemed unjust and advocates their replacement with self-managed, self-governed societies based on voluntary, cooperative institutions.
These institutions are often described as stateless societies, although several authors have defined them more specifically as distinct institutions based on non-hierarchical or free associations.
Anarchism's central disagreement with other ideologies is that it holds the state to be undesirable, unnecessary, and harmful.
Anarchism is usually placed on the far-left of the political spectrum, and much of its economics and legal philosophy reflect anti-authoritarian interpretations of communism, collectivism, syndicalism, mutualism, or participatory economics.
As anarchism does not offer a fixed body of doctrine from a single particular worldview, many anarchist types and traditions exist and varieties of anarchy diverge widely.
Anarchist schools of thought can differ fundamentally, supporting anything from extreme individualism to complete collectivism.
Strains of anarchism have often been divided into the categories of social and individualist anarchism, or similar dual classifications.
The etymological origin of the word anarchism is from the ancient Greek word "anarkhia", meaning "without a ruler", composed of the prefix "a-" (i.e.
"without") and the word "arkhos" (i.e.
"leader" or "ruler").
The suffix -ism denotes the ideological current that favours anarchy.
The word anarchism appears in English from 1642 as "anarchisme" and the word "anarchy" from 1539.
Various factions within the French Revolution labelled their opponents as anarchists, although few such accused shared many views with later anarchists.
Many revolutionaries of the 19th century such as William Godwin (1756–1836) and Wilhelm Weitling (1808–1871) would contribute to the anarchist doctrines of the next generation, but they did not use the word anarchist or anarchism in describing themselves or their beliefs.
The first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist () was Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809–1865), marking the formal birth of anarchism in the mid-19th century.
Since the 1890s and beginning in France, the term libertarianism has often been used as a synonym for anarchism and its use as a synonym is still common outside the United States.
On the other hand, some use libertarianism to refer to individualistic free-market philosophy only, referring to free-market anarchism as libertarian anarchism.
While opposition to the state is central to anarchist thought, defining anarchism is not an easy task as there is a lot of talk among scholars and anarchists on the matter and various currents perceive anarchism slightly differently.
Hence, it might be true to say that anarchism is a cluster of political philosophies opposing authority and hierarchical organization (including the state, capitalism, nationalism and all associated institutions) in the conduct of all human relations in favour of a society based on voluntary association, on freedom and on decentralisation, but this definition has the same shortcomings as the definition based on etymology (which is simply a negation of a ruler), or based on anti-statism (anarchism is much more than that) or even the anti-authoritarian (which is an "a posteriori" conclusion).
Nonetheless, major elements of the definition of anarchism include the following:
During the prehistoric era of mankind, an established authority did not exist.
It was after the creation of towns and cities that hierarchy was invented and anarchistic ideas espoused as a reaction.
Most notable examples of anarchism in the ancient world were in China and Greece.
In China, philosophical anarchism, meaning peaceful delegitimizing of the state, was delineated by Taoist philosophers (i.e.
Zhuangzi and Lao Tzu).
Likewise in Greece, anarchist attitudes were articulated by tragedians and philosophers.
Aeschylus and Sophocles used the myth of Antigone to illustrate the conflict between rules set by the state and personal autonomy.
Socrates questioned Athenian authorities constantly and insisted to the right of individual freedom of consciousness.
Cynics dismissed human law ("Nomos") and associated authorities while trying to live according to nature ("physis").
Stoics were supportive of a society based on unofficial and friendly relations among its citizens without the presence of a state.
During the Middle Ages, there was no anarchistic activity except some ascetic religious movements in the Islamic world or in Christian Europe.
This kind of tradition later gave birth to religious anarchism.
In Persia, a Zoroastrian Prophet known as Mazdak was calling for an egalitarian society and the abolition of monarchy, but he soon found himself executed by the king.
In Basra, religious sects preached against the state.
In Europe, various sects developed anti-state and libertarian tendencies.
Those currents were the precursor of religious anarchism in the centuries to come.
It was in the Renaissance and with the spread of reasoning and humanism through Europe that libertarian ideas emerged.
Writers were outlining in their novels ideal societies that were based not on coercion but voluntarism.
The Enlightenment further pushed towards anarchism with the optimism for social progress.
The turning point towards anarchism was the French Revolution in which the anti-state and federalist sentiments began to take a form, mostly by Enragés and "sans-culottes".
Some prominent figures of anarchism begun developing the first anarchist currents.
That is the era of classical anarchism that lasted until the end of the Spanish Civil War of 1936 and was the golden age of anarchism.
William Godwin espoused philosophical anarchism in England morally delegitimizing the state, Max Stirner's thinking paved the way to individualism and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon's theory of mutualism found fertile soil in France.
Mikhail Bakunin took mutualism and extended it to collectivist anarchism.
Bakunin's current (Jura Federation) entered the class worker union called the International Workingmen's Association (IWA), later known as the First International, formed in 1864 to unite diverse revolutionary currents.
Due to its links to active workers' movements, the International became a significant organisation.
Karl Marx became a leading figure in the International and a member of its General Council.
Proudhon's followers, the mutualists, opposed Marx's state socialism, advocating political abstentionism and small property holdings.
Bakunin's followers entered a bitter dispute with Marx which ended in 1872 with the split of the workers movement that officially took place in Hague.
The major reason lay in fundamentally different approaches on how the workers would emancipate themselves.
Marx was advocating for the creation of a political party to take part in electoral struggles whereas Bakunin thought that the whole set of Marx's thinking was very authoritarian.
Bakunin is famous for predicting that if such a party would gain power by Marxist's terms, it would end up to be the new tyrant of workers.
After being expelled from the IWA, anarchists formed the St. Imier International.
Under the influence of Peter Kropotkin, a Russian philosopher and scientist, anarcho-communism overlapped with collectivism.
Anarcho-communists, who drew inspiration from the 1871 Paris Commune, advocated for free federation and distribution of goods according to one needs.
The major argument of anarcho-communism was that Bakunian perspective would lead to antagonism among collectives.
At the turning of the century, anarchism had spread all over the world.
In China, small groups of students imported the humanistic pro-science version of anarcho-communism.
Tokyo was a hotspot for rebellious youth from countries of the far east, pouring into Japanese capital to study.
In Latin America, São Paulo was a stronghold and anarcho-syndicalism was the most prominent left-wing ideology.
During that time, a minority of anarchists embarked into utilizing of violence in order to achieve their political ends.
This kind of strategy is called propaganda of the deed.
The dismemberment of the French socialist movement into many groups and the execution and exile of many Communards to penal colonies following the suppression of the Paris Commune favoured individualist political expression and acts.
Even though many anarchists distanced themselves from these terrorist acts, anarchists were persecuted and given bad fame.
Illegalism, stealing the possessions of the rich because capitalists were not their rightful owners, was another strategy which some anarchists adopted during those same years.
Anarchists enthusiastically participated in the Russian Revolution.
During the revolution, anarchists had concerns, but they opted to support the revolution instead of the Whites.
However, they met harsh suppression after the Bolshevik government was stabilized.
Anarchists in central Russia were either imprisoned, driven underground or joined the victorious Bolsheviks.
Anarchists from Petrograd and Moscow instead fled to Ukraine.
The Kronstadt rebellion and Nestor Makhno's struggle in the Free Territory were the most notable examples.
With the anarchists being crashed in Russia, two new antithetical currents emerged, namely platformism and synthesis anarchism.
Platformists sought to create a coherent group that would push for the revolution while the latter were against anything that would resemble a political party.
The victory of the Bolsheviks in the October Revolution and the resulting Russian Civil War did serious damage to anarchist movements internationally.
Many workers and activists saw the Bolshevik success as setting an example and communist parties grew at the expense of anarchism and other socialist movements.
In France and the United States, members of the major syndicalist movements of the General Confederation of Labour and Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) left the organisations and joined the Communist International.
In the Spanish Civil War, anarchists and syndicalists (CNT and FAI) once again allied themselves with various currents of leftists.
Spain had a long anarchist tradition and anarchists played an important role in the war.
In response to the army rebellion, an anarchist-inspired movement of peasants and workers, supported by armed militias, took control of Barcelona and of large areas of rural Spain where they collectivised the land.
The Soviet Union provided some limited assistance at the beginning of the war, but the result was a bitter fight among communists and anarchists at a series of events named May Days as Joseph Stalin tried to seize control of the Republicans.
In the first years after World War II, the anarchist movement was severely damaged.
However, the 1960s witnessed a revival of anarchism.
The main causes of such a revival may have been the perceived failure of Marxism–Leninism and the tension build by the Cold War.
During this era, anarchism was mostly part of other movements critical to both the state and capitalism such as the anti-nuclear, environmental and pacifist movements, the New Left, or the counterculture of the 1960s.
Anarchism was also associated with the punk rock movement as exemplified by bands such as Crass and the Sex Pistols.
Although feminist tendencies have always been a part of the anarchist movement in the form of anarcha-feminism, they returned with vigour during the second wave of feminism in the 1960s.
Around the turn of the 21st century, anarchism grew in popularity and influence as part of the anti-war, anti-capitalist and anti-globalisation movements.
Anarchists became known for their involvement in protests against the meetings of the World Trade Organization (WTO), Group of Eight (G8) and the World Economic Forum (WEF).
Some anarchist factions at these protests engaged in rioting, property destruction and violent confrontations with the police.
These actions were precipitated by "ad hoc", leaderless, anonymous cadres known as black blocs—other organisational tactics pioneered in this time include security culture, affinity groups and the use of decentralised technologies such as the internet.
A significant event of this period was the confrontations at the WTO conference in Seattle in 1999.
Anarchist ideas have been influential in the development of the Zapatistas in Chiapas, Mexico, and the Democratic Federation of Northern Syria, more commonly known as Rojava, a "de facto" autonomous region in northern Syria.
Anarchist schools of thought had been generally grouped in two main historical traditions (individualist anarchism and social anarchism) which have some different origins, values and evolution.
The individualist wing of anarchism emphasises negative liberty (opposition to state or social control over the individual) while those in the social wing emphasise positive liberty to achieve one's potential and argue that humans have needs that society ought to fulfil, "recognising equality of entitlement".
In a chronological and theoretical sense, there are classical—those created throughout the 19th century—and post-classical anarchist schools—those created since the mid-20th century and after.
Beyond the specific factions of anarchist thought is philosophical anarchism which the theoretical stance that the state lacks moral legitimacy without accepting the imperative of revolution to eliminate it.
A component especially of individualist anarchism, philosophical anarchism may accept the existence of a minimal state as unfortunate and usually temporary, necessary evil, but argue that citizens do not have a moral obligation to obey the state when its laws conflict with individual autonomy.
One reaction against sectarianism within the anarchist milieu was anarchism without adjectives, a call for toleration first adopted by Fernando Tarrida del Mármol in 1889 in response to the bitter debates of anarchist theory at the time.
In abandoning the hyphenated anarchisms (i.e.
